== Hoop Helix | {DEMO}[https://hoop-helix.onrender.com] 

Hoop Helix is a Ruby on Rails application for exploring basketball through interactive visualizations.

Most basketball statistics answer questions like "Who scored the most points?" or "Who had the most assists?" Hoop Helix starts with a different question:

*How does an individual player contribute to the identity of a team?*

The project explores basketball as a connected system rather than a collection of individual performances. Every team develops its own patterns of play, distribution of responsibility, and style. Those patterns—its "DNA"—are what inspired the name *Hoop Helix*.

Rather than trying to predict outcomes or build advanced statistical models, Hoop Helix focuses on helping people explore the relationships that already exist within the data.

== Why This Project Exists

The original version of Hoop Helix was one of the first substantial projects I built while learning web development ten years ago.

Like many first projects, it contained ideas I still love alongside implementation decisions that make me laugh today.

Revisiting it has been an enjoyable reminder of how much I've grown as an engineer. Instead of starting from scratch, I chose to rebuild and refactor the application while preserving the original curiosity that inspired it.

Working through an older codebase has been valuable practice in recognizing opportunities for cleaner architecture, clearer abstractions, and more maintainable code. Along the way I've also been rediscovering ideas I had forgotten, keeping the ones that still feel interesting and replacing the ones that don't.

== Features

Current functionality includes:

* Team and player pages built from NBA Stats API data
* Playoff round exploration
* Contextual player rankings within a team
* Player contribution metrics expressed as percentages of team production
* Visual contribution components designed to make statistical relationships easier to understand
* Responsive layouts for desktop and mobile devices

Rather than emphasizing individual box score totals, the interface focuses on helping users understand how responsibility is distributed across an entire team.

== Architecture

The application is built with Ruby on Rails and retrieves live data from the NBA Stats API.

Rather than persisting large amounts of statistical data in a local database, Hoop Helix retrieves live data from the API while caching responses to improve performance and reduce unnecessary requests. I chose this approach because I wanted to better understand the API itself and explore how it might support future features.

As the project has evolved, I've continued refactoring the original architecture to better separate responsibilities.

Current architectural improvements include:

* Service objects for external API communication and data normalization
* Shared helper methods for reusable contribution calculations
* Reusable view components for player and team statistics
* Progressive reduction of duplicated business logic

This work is ongoing. Planned improvements include:

* Thorough automated test coverage
* Continued architectural refactoring
* SCSS cleanup and organization
* Removal of obsolete ERB templates
* Additional documentation throughout the codebase

== Visualizing Team DNA

One of the central ideas behind Hoop Helix is that basketball is easier to understand through relationships than isolated numbers.

The application currently explores those relationships through visual components such as:

* Team contribution distributions
* Player contribution comparisons
* Contextual team rankings
* Playoff progression and opponent context

Some visualizations are intentionally simple. Others will become more exploratory over time.

The goal is not to overwhelm users with statistics or predict future performance. Instead, I want to create tools that make patterns easier to notice and invite people to ask new questions about how teams function.

== Roadmap

Hoop Helix is intentionally an evolving project rather than one with a fixed endpoint.

Current areas of exploration include:

* Expanded visualization techniques
* Additional ways to compare player contributions
* Stronger automated test coverage
* Continued architectural refactoring
* WNBA support alongside NBA data
* Comparable contribution metrics across both leagues

As the project grows, I may use GitHub Projects to organize ideas, prioritize improvements, and track future development.

== Technology

* Ruby on Rails
* NBA Stats API
* SCSS
* HTML / ERB
* JavaScript
